Requirements and design of thin-edge Rust extensions (#1549)
thin-edge/thin-edge.io: design/thin-edge-actors-design.md

* behave accordingly to some internal state to which they have an exclusive access,
* send asynchronous messages to each others,
* process, one after the other, the messages received in their inbox,
* react to messages by sending other messages and updating their state,
* and possibly spawn other actors.

An actor can be:
* a source of messages,
* a mapper that consumes messages and produces translated messages,
* a transducer that consumes and produces messages but also maintains a state ruling its behavior,
* a server that delivers responses on requests,
* an end-point that logs, persists or forwards the messages to some external service.

In a running system, actors are connected with peers along various patterns:

* An actor can gather messages from several sources and dispatch messages to several recipients.
* Messages can be addressed to specific actors, or be broadcast to any interested recipients.
* An actor can be oblivious to the source and the destination of the messages flowing through it,
  processing messages independently of their source,
  and publishing out messages to any interested recipients.

> * By contrast, an actor can distinguish its peers,

Author: This is what I meant. I don't see what confuses you.

  possibly processing the messages accordingly to their sources
  and sending specific messages to each of them.
* Notably, a server sends response messages specifically to the requester.

The main benefits of this model in the context of thin-edge are:
* __Modularity__
  * An actor can be understood in isolation.

>   * The behavior of an actor is fully determined by its reaction at a given state to some given message.

Reviewer: Just curious - Is there a notion of contract for actors - for both a sender or a receiver and can it be represented in some declarative way?

Author: If we stick on the model, that is really dynamic and flexible, there is no declared contract. However, enforcing a contract is one of the benefits of using Rust for the implementation. Such a contract will be about the set of accepted input and output messages and the types of peer an actor can be connected to.

Reviewer: So in essence contract is implicitly enforced through our Rust layers....but nothing declarative. That should be completely fine in this phase.

  * Actors can be implemented, tested, and packaged independently.
* __Flexibility__
  * Actors can be connected in various way,
    as long as the recipients can interpret the messages received from others.

>   * An actor can be substituted by another that implements the same service,

Reviewer: This choice of which actor to pick for the same service needs to be made when- at packaging time, declaratively or dynamically?

Reviewer: Ok, fine with me.

  and thin-edge should not pre-defined all the messages that can be exchanged by actors.
  * A contributor should be able to define its own set of messages usable by others.  

## From actors to software components

Using actors is key but not enough.
Yes, the actor model helps thin-edge rust developers to implement components in isolation.
However, thin-edge also aims to provide flexibility to the agent developers with ready-to-use executables,
that can be tuned on-site for a specific use-case,
by activating only specific features among all those available.

The design must address not only the API for *actors* but also the packaging of these actors into *extensions*,
their integration into *executables* and their *configuration* by agent developers and end-users. 

* Elementary features are provided by __actors__: units of computation that interact with asynchronous messages.
* Actors are packaged into __extensions__: rust libraries that provide implementations along interfaces,
  input and output messages as well as instantiation services.
* A thin-edge __executable__ makes available a collection of extensions ready to be enabled on-demand.

> * A user provided __configuration__ enables and configures sherry-picked extensions making an agent.

Reviewer: This makes sense but I don't understand where does our current terminology "plugin" map to?

Author: I try to keep the term *plugin* for its current meaning: an extension written in any programming language and interacting with thin-edge over MQTT.

To be discussed:
* Do we really need to design *now* how the users could sherry-pick extensions from a batteries-included software?

>   This could be done in a second step, starting with static assemblages of actors.

Reviewer: Agree

* IIoT related messages are defined in specific extensions as `tedge_telemetry` or `tedge_software_management`.
* An extension must be provided for MQTT as well as another one for HTTP.
* An extension must be provided to encapsulate the thin-edge MQTT API,
  with the definition of all the MQTT topics 
* an MQTT connection plugin and a JSON plugin for telemetry messages.

One should be able to build batteries-included executables
that contains numerous extensions and alternative implementations for a large diversity of use-cases.

* An extension can be included in the final executable without being enabled, but only registered and ready to be used.
* Registered extensions can be enabled and configured at runtime.
* Having extensions included but not instantiated should not impact other extensions nor consume resources.
* Such an executable with enabled and non-enabled extensions must provide a command line option, say `--list-extensions`,
  to provide the whole list of available extensions and their purpose;
  as well as command line options for detailed help to enable those.

> 

Author: This were implied but I can make it explicit.

> 

Author: Added

* a transducer that consumes and produces messages but also maintains a state ruling its behavior,
* a server that delivers responses on requests,
* an end-point that logs, persists or forwards the messages to some external service.

In a running system, actors are connected with peers along various patterns:

* An actor can gather messages from several sources and dispatch messages to several recipients.
* Messages can be addressed to specific actors, or be broadcast to any interested recipients.
* An actor can be oblivious to the source and the destination of the messages flowing through it,
  processing messages independently of their source,
  and publishing out messages to any interested recipients.
* By contrast, an actor can distinguish its peers,
  possibly processing the messages accordingly to their sources
  and sending specific messages to each of them.
* Notably, a server sends response messages specifically to the requester.

The main benefits of this model in the context of thin-edge are:
* __Modularity__
  * An actor can be understood in isolation.
  * The behavior of an actor is fully determined by its reaction at a given state to some given message.

>   * Actors can be implemented, tested, and packaged independently.

Author: You are correct: the mapper will be composed of multiple actors.

  * An actor's peer simulator can be as simple as a pre-registered stream of messages,
    or as sophisticated as an error injector.
  * In a pure actor model setting, all interactions with the system are done via actors,
    and can be simulated, including the clock and the file system.

Thin-edge leverages Rust, adding robustness to the actor model.

* __Robustness__
  * No message can be sent if not understood by the recipient.
    The compatibility, between the messages sent to an actor
    and the messages this actor can actually process,
    is verified at compile-time.

However, using Rust also introduce specific challenges, as we will see below.
To name just a few:

* As all the message types have to be known at compile time,
  we need to be cautious not to make all the actor *implementations* depending on each others,
  due to dependencies at the *message* level.
  * The implementation of an actor that consumes telemetry data
    must not depend on the implementations of actors producing telemetry data - and vice versa.
* As no message can be sent without being understood by the recipient,
  we need a shared definition of IoT messages.

>   * Consumers and producers of telemetry data must agree on what is telemetry data.

Author: I will try to say a word about that but in another place of the document as having detours too soon might be confusing.

>   * Consumers and producers of telemetry data must agree on what is telemetry data.

Author: I added a short sentence about this domain specific extension.

* However, we also expect the system to be extended by independent vendors,
  and thin-edge should not pre-defined all the messages that can be exchanged by actors.

>   * A contributor should be able to define its own set of messages usable by others.  

Author: What do you mean by configurable?

their integration into *executables* and their *configuration* by agent developers and end-users. 

* Elementary features are provided by __actors__: units of computation that interact with asynchronous messages.
* Actors are packaged into __extensions__: rust libraries that provide implementations along interfaces,
  input and output messages as well as instantiation services.
* A thin-edge __executable__ makes available a collection of extensions ready to be enabled on-demand.
* A user provided __configuration__ enables and configures sherry-picked extensions making an agent.

To be discussed:
* Do we really need to design *now* how the users could sherry-pick extensions from a batteries-included software?
  This could be done in a second step, starting with static assemblages of actors.

## Requirements

One should be able to build a thin-edge executable from extensions that have been implemented independently.

* The thin-edge API must define how to create, connect and run actor instances.
* An extension should use the thin-edge API to define message types and implement actors as well as instantiation mechanisms.

> * Actors should loosely couple, only depending on a set of input and output messages to and from other actors

Author: Added

* The compatibility between two actors, one sending messages the other consuming them,
  must be checked at compile time leveraging rust types for messages and channels.
* If an actor expect specific peers, this must be enforced at compile time. 
* Two actors must not need a direct dependency relationships to be able to exchange messages, requests or responses.

>   In practice, one will have extensions with sole purpose to define message types.

Author: Updated

  So a consumer of messages, don't need to know any sources of such messages.
  And vice-versa, the producers don't have to depend (at the code level) on any consumers.
  Both consumers and producers only need a dependency on the message definitions.
* The thin-edge API should give a large flexibility to connect actors:
  * exchanging stream of messages as for measurements,
  * sending requests which responses are awaited by the requester,
  * sending asynchronous requests which responses will be processed concurrently with the other messages,
  * broadcasting messages,
  * gathering messages from various sources,
  * sending messages to one specific instance of an actor (as a request to the apt plugin).
* The final executable is build as an assemblage of extensions, defining actor instances and their connections.
* This must not be the sole way to create MQTT-based thin-edge executables - aka *plugins*.
  An agent developer must be free choosing his preferred programming language and design

>   to implement a feature that interacts with other thin-edge executables using JSON over MQTT.

Author: Two levels of components will co-exist. The actors use in-memory messages *inside* an executable. MQTT is used to exchange messages *between* executables.

One should be able to build executables with IIoT specific features.
* The `tedge_actor` crate defines only messages related to the runtime as `SpawnTask`, `Shutdown` or `Timeout`.
* IIoT related messages are defined in specific extensions as `tedge_telemetry` or `tedge_software_management`.
* An extension must be provided for MQTT as well as another one for HTTP.
* An extension must be provided to encapsulate the thin-edge MQTT API,
  with the definition of all the MQTT topics 
* an MQTT connection plugin and a JSON plugin for telemetry messages.

One should be able to build batteries-included executables
that contains numerous extensions and alternative implementations for a large diversity of use-cases.

* An extension can be included in the final executable without being enabled, but only registered and ready to be used.
* Registered extensions can be enabled and configured at runtime.

> * Having extensions included but not instantiated should not impact other extensions nor consume resources.

Author: added

* Such an executable with enabled and non-enabled extensions must provide a command line option, say `--list-extensions`,
  to provide the whole list of available extensions and their purpose;
  as well as command line options for detailed help on how to enable and configure those.

Robustness is key.
* One extension panicking should not impact other extensions or the runtime.
* All errors must be handled in a non-crashing way.
* Unrecoverable errors may cause the binary to shutdown eventually, but not unexpectedly.
* The framework must handle SIGTERM and signal a shutdown to all active actors.

> * Shutdown is signalled to all extensions, giving them a possibility to handle such case gracefully.

Author: Added

* It would be a plus, to have actors storing data using the framework:
  - to persist data between restarts of the deployment
  - to cache data during network outages

>   - to provide operation checkpoints during sensitive operations.

Author: Adding a persistent layer has by necessity an impact. However, more on latency and throughput rather than memory and CPU.

  * the actor owns the channel receiver and processes received messages,
  * the peers clone the channel sender and send messages for processing.

```rust
struct ActorA { state: AState, messages: Receiver<AMessage>, peer: Sender<BMessage> }

#[derive(Clone, Debug)]
enum AMessage {
  DoThis(ThisArg),
  DoThat(ThatArg),
}

impl A {
  pub async fn run(mut self) {
    while let Some(message) = self.messages.recv().await {
      match message {
        DoThis(arg) => {
          // update self.state
          self.state += 1;
          
          // send messages to self.peer, triggering asynchronous operations
          let _ = self.peer.send("this").await;
        }
        DoThat(arg) => {
          // update self.state
          self.state += 1;

          // send messages to self.peer, triggering asynchronous operations
          let _ = self.peer.send("that").await;
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

In practice, constructing and deconstructing messages leads to boilerplate code.
To avoid that, we can wrap the message-based interface behind regular method invocations.

```rust
struct ActorHandlerA {
  sender: Sender<AMessage>
}

> impl ActorHandlerA {

Author: Indeed that might help to see the interactions. However, I also think that presenting two half-coded actors might be confusing.

=> Hence, I added full code both `A` and `B`. Let me know if this start to be a too long example.

  like reading high priority messages first or awaiting a response
* Key points are not addressed by this example.
  * Who creates the actor channels and instances?
  * How actors and peers are connected to each others?
  * Who spawns the actor `run()` method?

### Messages

Messages must flow freely between actors with no constraints on ownership and thread.
As they are used to improved observability, they must be `Display`.

```rust
/// A message exchanged between two actors
pub trait Message: Clone + Display + Send + Sync + 'static {}

/// There is no need to tag messages as such
impl<T: Clone + Display + Send + Sync + 'static> Message for T {}
```

Typical examples of thin-edge messages are telemetry data, operation requests and outcomes,
but also low level messages as MQTT messages, HTTP requests and responses,
and even system specific messages as file-system events and update requests.

To be discussed:
* Do the messages need to be `Clone`?
  This has to be considered along the idea of using `oneshot` channel for the response to a request.
  It might be better to be explicit
  and use `Message + Clone` in contexts where messages are broadcast.

### Channels

> Multi-producer single-consumer (`mpsc`) channels are used to exchange messages between actors.

Reviewer 2: Since we have a lot of inherent pub-sub interactions, wouldn't we need a multi-producer multi-consumer channel as well to emulate the MQTT broker?

Author: This is what we used for the very first version of thin-edge. But it was a mistake because if a consumer is slow than all the others are slowed down. The broadcast channel with used was even discarding messages to cope with such cases. If broadcast is required we can always clone messages over several `mpsc` senders.

* A channel is created for each actor instance.
* The receiver of this channel is given to the recipient actor.
* Clones of the channel sender are given to any actor that needs to send messages to this instance.
* With this setup, each actor instance owns
  - an `mpsc::Receiver` end
  - and a bunch of `mpsc::Sender`s, one per peer. 
* The actors process then in turn the received messages,
  updating their internal state and sending messages to their peers. 

Having a single receiver per actor improves modularity, observability and testability,
since all the inputs for an actor are going through this receiver.
Similarly, having the peers of an actor materialized by channel senders
helps to understand and test the actors in isolation.

However, for this to work, several points need to be addressed, regarding:

* Message types
* Channel types
* Channel creation and ownership
* Actor with no inputs
* Addressing responses
* Out-of-band runtime messages

> * Size of the channel buffers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Size of the channel buffers
* Persistence of the channels
```
For robustness and resumability.

Author: Indeed a key point. However, I will put that in another place in the document - as a refinement.

Author: This has been added as a "nice to have".

# Thin-edge actor-based components

The aim of thin-edge is to empower IoT software developers,
with a large set of pre-build components
that can be enabled, configured, extended and combined
into IoT specific agents.

For that purpose, thin-edge leverages the actor model
and provides the tools to combine these actors into independent extensions
and then into full-fledged executables the users can adapt to their use-cases.

This document outlines the main decisions toward this design.

## Why actors?

The core idea of the [actor model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Actor_model) is
to implement a system with independent processing units, the actors, that
* behave accordingly to some internal state to which they have an exclusive access,
* send asynchronous messages to each others,
* process, one after the other, the messages received in their inbox,
* react to messages by updating their state, by sending messages to other actors, and possibly by spawning new actors.

All the interactions between actors are materialized by messages.

> * Synchronous method invocations are replaced by asynchronous message exchanges.

Author: What I mean is that there no direct method invocations between entities managing a state.

- Without actors the code of the callee is executed in the thread of the caller. The caller has to wait for an exclusive access on the callee and then to wait the response from the callee.
- With actors, the callee process the request in its own thread. The caller can send requests without exclusive access and can but is not force to await the response of the callee.

  * Actors can be implemented, tested, and packaged independently.
* __Flexibility__
  * Actors can be connected in various way,
    as long as the recipients can interpret the messages received from others.
  * An actor can be substituted by another that implements the same service,
    i.e. that sends and receives the same message types.
* __Observability__
  * The behavior of an actor can be fully observed, by listening the stream of messages received and sent.
  * In a pure actor model setting, any state change can be traced to a message,
    being either triggered by a message or notified by a message.
  * The messages being serializable, they can be logged, persisted, audited, forwarded to the cloud.
* __Testability__
  * An actor can be tested in isolation as well as in combination.
  * An actor can be exercised with arbitrary sequences of input messages,
    while its output is observed and verified,
    and some of its peers being possibly simulated.
  * An actor's peer simulator can be as simple as a pre-registered stream of messages,
    or as sophisticated as an error injector.
  * In a pure actor model setting, all interactions with the system are done via actors,

>     and can be simulated, including the clock and the file system.

Author: This is what is listed under Flexibility. I agree that both applies.

and [in-memory channels](https://docs.rs/tokio/latest/tokio/sync/index.html).
Alice highlights that the issues are
*not* on the implementation of the actor processing loop,
*but* on how the actors are built, interconnected and spawn.

But among the existing Rust actor frameworks,
[actix](https://docs.rs/actix/latest/actix/) being the most notable one,
the focus is on abstracting the [actor life cycle](https://docs.rs/actix/latest/actix/trait.Actor.html#actor-lifecycle),
with specific methods to tell what to do at each stage
and [how to handle each specific message type](https://docs.rs/actix/latest/actix/trait.Handler.html).
Beyond the fact that this gives little help compared to pattern-matching on the received messages,
this adds strong constraints on how message reception and emission are interleaved,
this life cycle being controlled by the framework.
The `Handler` trait is perfect to define how to react to some input,
but how to send spontaneous messages or to arbitrarily defer a reaction?

To address the main issue - i.e. to build a mesh of connected actors,
Actix distinguishes the [`Actor`](https://docs.rs/actix/latest/actix/prelude/trait.Actor.html) from its

> [`Context`](https://docs.rs/actix/latest/actix/struct.Context.html) but tightly couples one the other.

Author: fixed

      thin-edge provides enhanced receivers and senders, ready to be used by the actors.
        * For instance, a `LoggingReceiver` listens to two source of messages,
          a main input channel and a channel connected to the runtime,
          gives priority to runtime messages,
          and logs all the messages just before yielding them to the actor.
1. Establish all the actor connections using message senders given by the consumers to the producers.
    * This is the corner stone of the design!
    * For a consumer actor being able to receive messages sent by some producer actor,
      the consumer needs to give to the producer a channel `Sender` associated to one of its own receivers;
      and the producer has to register this `Sender` to its own set of senders.
    * In practice, the messages sent by a producer actor are *not* of the exact type expected by the consumer actor.
      Most of the time because the consumer expect messages from several sources, but not only,
      as the producer might also send messages that need some adaptation before being consumed.
      For that purpose, the actors exchange `Box<dyn Sender>`

>       which `send()` method can be adapted to match the constraints of the consumer.

Author: Updated to:

```
      For that purpose, the actors exchange a dynamic sender (a `Box<dyn Sender>`)
      which `send()` method casts the message of the sender into the type expected by the receiver.
```

    * Using specific `Sender` implementations is also useful to implement various ways to dispatch messages:
      e.g. broadcasting, sending a response to the requester, sending messages to subscribers.
1. Use actor builders to organize the connections among actors.
    * Builders help to tie the knot when two actors need to establish a bidirectional connection
      (say to exchange responses for requests). Each actor needs a sender associated to the receiver of the other.

>       This can be done with senders that are updated in a second step (starting from senders acting as `/dev/null`).

Author: This is more to give a gist rather than the details.

      However, using builder also helps to address ownership issues: to receive messages on its own receiver, an actor,
      or more specifically the actor builder, has to keep a copy of the sender attached to this receiver.
      This sender (to self) is then cloned and given to any actor that aims to send messages to the actor under construction.
      When the actor instance is created these senders to self can be dropped.

>     * The capabilities of an actor are make available to the others through connection-related traits implemented by the builders.

Author: fixed

      These traits define the exchange of message senders at build-time.
      E.g a source of messages expects to be given a message sender where to produce its messages.

>       Similar traits are defined for sinks (they can give a sender which messages will be consumed by the sink),

Author: Fixed

      for service providers (for which two senders have to be exchanged, one for the requests, the other for the responses),
      and service consumers (that need to exchange senders with the service provider).
    * The actors are connected to each other before any actor's `run()` event loop is launched.
      The first version of thin-edge actor crate doesn't specifically address the ability to connect running actors.

>       However, the design doesn't preclude it. To make this happens an actor will have to

Author: Fixed

      (these registration request and response being regular messages with a payload that contains a sender).

The following diagram highlights some of these points.

![an actor](diagrams/actor.svg)

* The actor instance owns a set of receivers, forming its input message box.
* The actor also owns a set of senders connected to the receivers of its peers.
* These connections between peers have been established by exchanging senders.
  This actor gave, to input-source peers, senders that are associated to its message box,
  and kept sender copies given by output-recipient peers.
* Even the communication with the runtime is established using senders,
  so this actor can listen to runtime signals and trigger runtime actions
  using the same mechanisms as for any other peer interaction.
* Sophisticated synchronization mechanisms can be implemented under the hood
  by the message senders and receivers. Here the runtime message sender is multiplexed
  into all the actor receivers. So a runtime signal - for instance a shutdown request,
  is broadcast on all the channels and is processed with a high priority.

> ## Requirements

Author: In theory yes ... but in practice I find the text easier to read that way.

Reading a huge list of requirements is quite boring, especially when you don't know what we are speaking about.

One should be able to build a thin-edge executable from extensions that have been implemented independently.

* The thin-edge API must define how to create, connect and run actor instances.
* Actors should be loosely coupled, only depending on message types defined by peer actors
  and not strongly dependent on specific peer actor implementations.
* The compatibility between two actors, one sending messages the other consuming them,
  must be checked at compile time leveraging rust types for messages and channels.
* If an actor expect to be connected to specific peers, this must be enforced at compile time,
  these peers being solely defined by the types of the exchanged messages. 

> * Two actors must not need a direct dependency relationships to be able to exchange messages, requests or responses.

Author: fixed

  In practice, one might have crates with sole purpose to define message types.
  So a consumer of messages, don't need to know any sources of such messages.
  And vice-versa, the producers don't have to depend (at the code level) on any consumers.
  Both consumers and producers only need a dependency on the message definitions.
* The thin-edge API should give a large flexibility to connect actors:
  * exchanging stream of messages as for measurements,
  * sending requests which responses are awaited by the requester,

>   * sending asynchronous requests which responses will be processed concurrently with the other messages,

Author: fixed

  * broadcasting messages,
  * gathering messages from various sources,
  * sending messages to one specific instance of an actor.
* Actors should support being synchronous, with the ability to pause awaiting the response of another actor.

> * The final executable is build as an assemblage of extensions, defining actor instances and their connections.

Author: fixed

> * Using Rust actors must not be the unique way to create MQTT-based thin-edge executables - aka *plugins*.

Author: Updated

  An agent developer must be free to choose his preferred programming language
  to implement a feature that interacts with other thin-edge executables using JSON over MQTT.

One should be able to build executables with IIoT specific features.

> * The `tedge_actors` crate defines only messages related to the runtime as `Spawn` or `Shutdown`.

Author: Fixed

* IIoT related messages are defined in specific extensions as `tedge_telemetry` or `tedge_software_management`.
* An extension must be provided so an actor can pub/sub messages over MQTT.
* Similarly, an extension must be provided to let actors interact with HTTP end-points.
* An extension must be provided to encapsulate the thin-edge MQTT API,
  with the definition of all the MQTT topics and message payloads.

Robustness is key.
* One actor panicking should not impact other actors or the runtime.
* All errors must be handled in a non-crashing way.
* Unrecoverable errors may cause the binary to shut down eventually, but not unexpectedly.
* The framework must handle SIGTERM and signal a shutdown to all active actors.

> * Shutdown is signalled to all extensions, giving them a possibility to handle such case gracefully.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Shutdown is signalled to all actors/extensions, giving them a possibility to handle such case gracefully.
```

Author: updated

>   Each actor do a shutdown its own way, ignoring pending messages or not, stopping to send messages or not.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Each actor handles shutdown requests its own way, ignoring pending messages or not, stopping to send messages or not.
```

  After some delay, the runtime aborts any actor that failed to terminate on time.
  However, the robustness of the solution should not always rely on graceful shutdowns
  and should be designed to cope with unexpected crashes or SIGKILLs.

Observability and testability:
* An actor should be testable in isolation, with
  - a configurable initial state,
  - simulated inputs,
  - checked outputs,
  - possibly simulated peers.
* Every actor must have a unique id built after the actor type as known by the users.
* A user must be able to configure logging per-component as well as globally,
  tracing the messages processed by each actor
  as well as those forwarded to peers.

The runtime itself should behave as an actor, with messages that can be traced.
* Runtime messages should be used for all runtime actions:

>   - to activate and deactivate extensions at runtime

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - to activate and deactivate actors/extensions at runtime
```

Author: Fixed

  - to start and stop actors,
  - to set and trigger timeout,

>   - to shut down the system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - to shut down the system.
  - to check the health of a spawned actor
```

Author: Added

> * Runtime messages sent to an actor must be processed with a higher priority.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Runtime messages sent to an actor must be processed with a higher priority, although this is up to the actor developer, and something that the framework can not enforce
```

Author: Added

* An actor should be able to send messages to the runtime:
  - to trigger an action as spawning a task
  - to notify errors.
* Runtime messages must be traceable as regular messages,
  so a user should be able to observe all runtime actions.

Nice to have ideas that are out-of-scope of the first implementation of the actor model for thin-edge:
* It would be a plus, to have actors storing data using the framework:
  - to persist data between restarts of the deployment
  - to cache data during network outages
  - to provide operation checkpoints during sensitive operations.
* It would be handy to build batteries-included executables
  that contains numerous extensions and alternative implementations for a large diversity of use-cases.
  - An extension can be included in an executable without being enabled, but only registered and ready to be used.
  - Registered extensions can be enabled and configured at runtime. 
  - Having extensions included but not instantiated should not impact other extensions nor consume runtime resources.

>   - Such an executable with enabled and non-enabled extensions must provide a command line option, say `--list-extensions`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Such an executable with enabled and disabled extensions must provide a command line option, say `--list-extensions`,
```

Author: Fixed

    to provide the whole list of available extensions and their purpose;
    as well as command line options for detailed help on how to enable and configure those.

## Detailed design aspects

The point here is not to detail all the design aspects, but to address the points that are important and challenging.

### Actor sketch

The design key ideas exposed above aim to let the actor implementations be as unconstrained as possible.

Message types can be freely defined. They only need to be free of concurrency and ownership constraints.

```rust
/// A message has simply to be Debug + Send + Sync + 'static
#[derive(Debug)]
pub struct MyInput {
  /// message fields must be Send + Sync + 'static
}
```

All the interactions of an actor with peers are done via `mpsc` channels.
An actor implementation has to own a set of `Receiver` and `Sender` along its state.

```rust
/// A typical actor owns a single receiver and a bunch of senders.
/// 
/// But this is not a rule.
/// An actor can have single sender for all its output.

> /// Or `tokio::select!` over a bunch of receivers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
/// Or have a bunch of receivers from which it can `tokio::select!` an input
```

Author: Updated

pub struct MyActor {
    /// The state that rules the actor behavior
    state: MyActorSate,
    
    /// The queue of input messages for this actor
    input_box: Receiver<MyInput>,
    
    /// Different output channels targeting specific peers
    peer_a: Sender<PeerAInput>,
    peer_b: Sender<PeerBInput>,
    peer_c: Sender<PeerCInput>,
}
```

The behavior of an actor is simply defined by an `async fn run(&mut self)` method.
Note that no extra context, runtime or peer information are passed to the actor event loop.

```rust
impl MyActor {
  /// The actor event loop
  pub async fn run(&mut self) -> Result<(), RuntimeError> {

>     // - consume messages received on `self.input_box`
>     // - send messages to peers over `self.peer_XXX`
>     // - update `self.state`
>     // - forward errors to the appropriate peer 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // - consume messages received on `self.input_box`
    // - update `self.state`
    // - send messages/errors to peers over `self.peer_x` senders
```
Just to align with the typical flow: receive input -> process -> send output/error

Author: Updated

    // - give up with a `RuntimeError` on fatal errors
  }
}
```

> ### No need for an `Handle` trait

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### No need for a `Handle` trait
```

Author: Fixed

that can be tuned on-site for a specific use-case,
by activating only specific features among all those available.

The design must address not only the API for *actors* but also the packaging of these actors into *extensions*,
their integration into *executables* and their *configuration* by agent developers and end-users. 

* Elementary features are provided by __actors__: units of computation that interact with asynchronous messages.
* Actors are packaged into __extensions__: rust libraries that provide implementations along interfaces,
  input and output messages as well as instantiation services.
* A thin-edge __executable__ makes available a collection of extensions ready to be enabled on-demand.
* A user provided __configuration__ enables and configures sherry-picked extensions making an agent.

To be discussed:
* Do we really need to design *now* how the users could sherry-pick extensions from a batteries-included software?
  This could be done in a second step, starting with static assemblages of actors.

## Requirements

One should be able to build a thin-edge executable from extensions that have been implemented independently.

> 

Reviewer 3: Maybe an additional requirement (if it is not covered by an existing point)

```suggestion
* Actors should be composable and support being synchronous. This would allow the reusing of existing actors in other actors to build an overarching orchestrator.  For example, Actor A receives a message, sends a message to Actor B to let the existing actor do some work, waits for Actor B to finish, then Actors A sends a message that it is finished
```

A concrete example of this is the handling of Cumulocity Device Profile operations. This operation contains the same contents as the software, configuration and firmware operations, but it rolled into one operation, where each type of item is processed serially (to avoid conflicting side-effects). It would make sense if the device profile actor could reuse the same logic already implemented for the software, configuration and firmware handling.

Author: This is an important point ... but for which I struggled to find a solution.

This is required for two reasons:
* to avoid conflicting concurrent operations, as you said
* but also, to have simpler code. To manage concurrent operations, an actor has to maintain some specific state for each on-going operation and to store and resume these states on each context switch. Hence having the ability for an actor to pause awaiting the response of another is key to mix event-loop and async/await programming style.  

=> I will add this requirement to the doc.

Author: Added.

  with the definition of all the MQTT topics and message payloads.

One should be able to build batteries-included executables
that contains numerous extensions and alternative implementations for a large diversity of use-cases.

* An extension can be included in the final executable without being enabled, but only registered and ready to be used.
* Registered extensions can be enabled and configured at runtime.
* Having extensions included but not instantiated should not impact other extensions nor consume runtime resources.
* Such an executable with enabled and non-enabled extensions must provide a command line option, say `--list-extensions`,
  to provide the whole list of available extensions and their purpose;
  as well as command line options for detailed help on how to enable and configure those.

Robustness is key.
* One extension panicking should not impact other extensions or the runtime.
* All errors must be handled in a non-crashing way.
* Unrecoverable errors may cause the binary to shutdown eventually, but not unexpectedly.
* The framework must handle SIGTERM and signal a shutdown to all active actors.

> * Shutdown is signalled to all extensions, giving them a possibility to handle such case gracefully.

Reviewer 3: So would this support the following?
* Shutdown is signalled, all components are signaled and stop posting new messages to the queue, and the remaining messages in the queue are drained before the soft shutdown (though limiting how much time this takes to avoid a hard shutdown via `SIGKILL`).

Or are the actor messages fairly light weight, and any publishing of outgoing mqtt messages to broker are persisted by the broker itself?

Motivation here is to publish as any outgoing mqtt messages before the services or device is shutdown so that the cloud side has the latest information about the device (in case if the device has problems coming back online)

Author: What I have in mind is:
* The shutdown is triggered by an actor that listen to `SIGTERM`.
* On shutdown, the runtime sends a shutdown to all running actors.
* Each actor do a shutdown its own way, ignoring pending messages or not, stopping to send messages or not.
   * For instance, the MQTT actor might continue to publish all pending messages, while a measurement source might simply stop emitting.
* After some time, the runtime aborts any actor still running.

Author: Added some clarifications

  - to trigger an action as spawning a task
  - to notify errors.
* Runtime messages must be traceable as regular messages,
  so a user should be able to observe all runtime actions.

## Proposal

As [well described by Alice Ryhl](https://ryhl.io/blog/actors-with-tokio/),
actors can be implemented with Tokio directly, without using any actor libraries.
Indeed, [tokio](https://docs.rs/tokio/latest/tokio/index.html) provides the key building blocks for actors:
[asynchronous tasks](https://docs.rs/tokio/latest/tokio/task/index.html)
and [channels](https://docs.rs/tokio/latest/tokio/sync/index.html).

This is apriori my preferred approach because simple and with a full control on when and how our code is invoked
while this is implicit with most actor frameworks.

That said, [actix](https://docs.rs/actix/latest/actix/) is a notable actor implementation for Rust.
So, this is an option to consider,
even if I would prefer to avoid the inerrant overhead of using such a large crate.

To guide a decision toward an actor system for thin-edge, this document
* explores a design on top of tasks and channels,
* and compares this design with actix,

>   highlighting what would be provided out-of the box, easier or more complex. 

Author: Nothing has been done to compare this proposal with actix.

* These requests can be handled by specific methods of the `Actor` trait, as a `shutdown()` method.
  However, it might be simpler to let the actor implementations processes these messages as any other messages.
* These runtime messages must be handled with a higher priority as regular ones.
  A shutdown request should not wait for all pending messages to be processed first.
* This priority mechanism must be encapsulated by the actor mailbox,
  to be able to improve prioritization of message delivery.
* A simple option to do that is to use two `mpsc` channels for a mailbox,
  one for high-priority messages, the other for regular messages.
* Using a [`biased tokio::select!`](https://docs.rs/tokio/latest/tokio/macro.select.html#fairness)
  ensures that high-priority messages will be delivered first to the actor.
* Sending high-priority messages could be open to regular actor peers.
  However, it must then be clear that there is a risk for regular messages to be stalled.

#### Size of the channel buffers

* With unbounded channels, there is a risk of actors being overflowed
  and failing to catch up till memory exhaustion.

> * Bounded channels enable back-pressure from slow actors onto fast ones,

Reviewer 3: The decision of unbounded or bounded channels might depend on the function.

It is important that we also support blocking style communication for specific actors (or messages?) so we can make the actors more composable. For some operations such as firmware, software, configuration, these generally should be processed serially to make the handling of those side-effect heavy artefacts more predictable (and generally the order does matter, so we want this to be repeatable).

Also by supporting serial processing of some messages means that operations can also be "queued" on the cloud side, and the user can be reassured that the operations will be processed in the order that they were created.

Author: That's a good point: the decision must be delegated to the code that connects the actors.

  * This is a place to adapt sent messages to the type actually expected by the receiver.
  * They can also act as facades that build and send messages on regular method invocations.

## Detailed Proposal

Key design ideas:

> * All the events, requests and responses that affect the behaviour of an actor (including timeouts and cancellations)

Reviewer 2: The responses would be going to another actor's mailbox, right?

Author: Yes correct. I will add a diagram to make things more visual.

Abstracting both the senders and receivers, we can implement specific mechanisms
to manage message priority, timeout, cancellation and more.

The receiver part is abstracted by a concrete type: a mailbox for a specific type of messages.
A key design point is that *all* the interactions with an actor must go through such a mailbox,
including runtime errors, cancellations and timeouts.
Doing so simplifies the actor event loops to `while let Some(message) = self.mailbox.next().await { ... }`
and gives the flexibility to improve the system with new message delivery mechanisms.

```rust
/// A mailbox that gather *all* the messages sent to an actor, including runtime messages.
impl<M : From<RuntimeMessage>> Mailbox<M> {
  /// Pop from the mailbox the message with the highest priority
  /// 
  /// Await till a messages is available.
  /// Return `None` when all the senders to this mailbox have been dropped and all the messages consumed.
  pub async fn next(&mut self) -> Option<M> {
    // ...
  }
  
  /// Turn on/off logging of the messages consumed from this mailbox.
  /// 
  /// The messages are logged when returned by the `next()` method.

>   pub fn log_inputs(&mut self, on: bool) {

Reviewer 2: The developer is expected to turn this logging ON/OFF in code? Or this API will be connected to the external logging system like the `tracing` logger to control it more dynamically?

Author: This is a sketch of the API. Logging will be turn on/off by the user.

What I'm doing with this document is to find the right owner for each feature. Giving the responsibility of message logging to the mailbox makes this feature available to all actors without having to change the actor code if we improve logging.

  }
}

pub enum RuntimeMessage {
  RuntimeError(RuntimeError),
  Timeout,
  Shutdown,
  LogInputs(bool),
  LogOutputs(bool),
  // ...
}
```

The message sender of an actor is implemented as an `Address<M>`, the address of its mailbox.

```rust
/// Create a new mailbox with its address
pub fn new_mailbox<M>(buffer: usize) -> (Mailbox<M>, Address<M>) {
  // ...
}

impl<M : From<RuntimeMessage>> Address<M> {
  /// Send a message to the mailbox with that address
  /// 
  /// Await the messages is actually in the mailbox.
  /// Fail when the mailbox has been dropped.
  pub async fn send_message(&mut self, message: M) -> Result<(), ChannelError> {
    // ...
  }

  /// Clone this address which can then be used from another actor
  fn clone(&self) -> Self {
    // ...
  }
}
```

However, actors can not directly use the addresses of their peers.
If an actor sends messages of type `A` to an actor that processes messages of type `B: From<A>`,
then we do not want the source actor to be aware of the `B` message type,
and still less the unrelated message types consumed by the target as `C: Into<B>`.
Indeed, that `B` message type encompasses all the message kinds supported by the target,

> and these, as the `C` type, can be completely unrelated to the source business domain that is described by the `A` type.

Reviewer 2: It was hard to follow those couple of sentences.

Author: When I feel the urgent need to add a diagram this is a sign that this is not so clear even to me ;-).

I will try to come with something clearer.

Instead of an `Address<B>`, the source must be provided a `Recipient<A>`,
that wraps the `Address<B>` and casts the `A` messages into `B` values under the hood.
Without such an adapter, the source actor would have to depend on the `B` type. 

![recipients](diagrams/recipients.svg)

This adaptation of addresses into recipients is done using an intermediate trait: `Sender<M>`.
The `Recipient<M>` is just a convenient way to manipulate boxes of `dyn` values.

```rust
/// A recipient for messages of type `M`
pub type Recipient<M> = Box<dyn Sender<M>>;

#[async_trait]
pub trait Sender<M>: 'static + Send + Sync {
    /// Send a message to the recipient,
    /// returning an error if the recipient is no more expecting messages
    async fn send(&mut self, message: M) -> Result<(), ChannelError>;

    /// Clone this sender in order to send messages to the same recipient from another actor
    fn recipient_clone(&self) -> Recipient<M>;
}

/// An `Address<M>` is a `Recipient<N>` provided `N` implements `Into<M>`
impl<M: Message> Address<M> {

>   pub fn as_recipient<N: Message + Into<M>>(&self) -> Recipient<N> {

Reviewer 2: It would have been better if such type conversions are done using an externally pluggable adaptors rather than expecting an `impl of Address<M>`. Else, it feels like every `Address`es needs to be aware of what all it can be converted into, which would lead to tight coupling between components.

Author: I agree that there is still room for improvement regarding these adapters. Even more, this is a key design point we need to polish.

However, note the loose type constraint: `<N: Message + Into<M>>`. Note also that this method returns a `Recipient` i.e. a `dyn` object abstracting the concrete address and ready to be used by an other actor unaware of the `M` message type.

```rust
impl C8YHandler {
    pub fn as_measurement_consumer(&self) -> Recipient<Measurement> {
         self.address.as_recipient()
    }
    pub fn as_event_consumer(&self) -> Recipient<Event> {
         self.address.as_recipient()
    }
    pub fn as_alarm_consumer(&self) -> Recipient<Alarm> {
         self.address.as_recipient()
    }
}
```

}

impl From<Recipient<C8yMapperOutput>> for C8yMapperPeers {
  fn from(recipient: Recipient<C8yMapperOutput>) -> Self {
    C8yMapperPeers {
      sw_manager: SWManager::from(recipient),
      op_schedule: OpScheduler::from(recipient),
    }
  }
}

struct SWManager {
  sender: Recipient<SoftwareRequest>
}

impl SWManager {
  pub async fn do_this(&mut self, arg: ThisArg) -> Result<(), ChannelError> {
    let req : SoftwareRequest = arg.into();
    self.sender.send(req).await
  }

  pub async fn do_that(&mut self, arg: ThatArg) -> Result<(), ChannelError> {
    let req : SoftwareRequest = arg.into();
    self.sender.send(req).await
  }
}

struct OpScheduler {
  sender: Recipient<OperationRequest>
}

impl OpScheduler {
  pub async fn say(&mut self, arg: &str) -> Result<(), ChannelError> {
    let req : OperationRequest = arg.into();
    self.sender.send(req).await
  }
}
```

To be discussed:
* Can these smart handlers be generated by a macro?

#### Abstracting channels from peers

#### Actor with no inputs or outputs

An actor can have no input messages and only acts as a source of output messages.
Similarly, an actor can have not output messages and be a sink of input messages.

> Notable examples are respectively a source of measurements and a message logger.

Reviewer 2: Having a single centralised logging Actor could be a bit complex to maintain when the target of different actors could be separate log files on the disk. Sounds like an unnecessary complexity for now. Leaving the logging to individual actors themselves would be simpler, I feel.

Author: > Having a single centralised logging Actor could be a bit complex to maintain when the target of different actors could be separate log files on the disk. Sounds like an unnecessary complexity for now. Leaving the logging to individual actors themselves would be simpler, I feel.

I agree. That said, at this design stage, it's important to understand what would be necessary to implement such a logger.
